KEP-4381: DRA: sync KEP with implementation in 1.31 (#4808)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-node/4381-dra-structured-parameters/README.md

kind: DeviceClass
metadata:
  name: acme-gpu
spec:
  selectors:
  - cel:
      expression: device.driverName == "gpu.acme.example.com"
  config:
  - opaque:
      driver: gpu.acme.example.com
      parameters:
        apiVersion: gpu.acme.example.com/v1
        kind: GPUInit
        # DANGER! This option must not be accepted for
        # user-supplied parameters.
        initCommand:
          - /usr/local/bin/acme-gpu-init
          - --cluster
          - my-cluster
```

> #### Partial GPU allocation

Reviewer: Could you please expand the description of this section to point out that the partial allocation is not out of the box, the device needs to be exposed as a bunch of sub-devices that can be allocated separately. Otherwise it seems that the scheduler will be able to use the `attributes` or `capacity` on its own to consume a portion of available device property.

Author: Thanks for the review! It helps to have someone go through it with fresh eyes.

I've fixed the examples and extended the "Partial GPU allocation". Can you check that it makes more sense now and re-add the LGTM if it does?

Reviewer: Absolutely.
/lgtm

because the allocation result is tracked in those claims, not the
`ResourceSlice` objects (see [below](#state-and-communication)).

#### Devices as a named list

Embedded inside each `ResourceSlice` is a list of one or more devices, each with sets of attributes
and quantities.

```yaml
kind: ResourceSlice
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1alpha3
...
spec:
  # The node name indicates the node.
  #
  # Each driver on a node provides pools of devices for allocation,
  # with unique device names inside each pool. A pool might be defined
  # by more than one ResourceSlice.
  nodeName: worker-1
  pool:

>     ...

Reviewer 2: Why not populate this for a more complete example?

Author: I think it's irrelevant at this early stage.

Tim went further in one of his review comments and didn't want to start the KEP with YAML code at all. The argument was that this forces people to learn about the API instead of getting to know concepts first.

I'm not going that far yet in this PR, but not showing a pool is one step in that direction.

Reviewer 2: That's fair. Let's leave it as is then.

  driver: cards.dra.example.com
  devices:
  - name: card-1 # unique inside the worker-1 pool
    basic:
      attributes:
        manufacturer: # a vendor-specific attribute, automatically qualified as cards.dra.example.com/manufacturer
          string: Cards-are-us Inc.
        productName:
          string: ACME T1000 16GB
        driverVersion:
          version: 1.2.3
        runtimeVersion:
          version: 11.1.42
        powerSavingSupported:
          bool: true
        dra.k8s.io/pciRoot: # a fictional standardized attribute, not actually part of this KEP
          string: pci-root-0
      capacity:
        memory: 16Gi
```

Compared to labels, attributes have values of exactly one type. Quantities are defined

> in the separate `capacity` map. As described later on, both sets can be used in CEL expressions to select a

Reviewer 2: Can we add some more text here explaining why there is a separation of Attributes / Capacities?

Author: As far as I am concerned, that is "because someone asked me to". It never made a lot of sense to me.

Reviewer 2: I believe the rationale is so that we can (in the future) reference these outside of CEL expressions as explicit resource requests, i.e. instead of:
```
      selectors:
      - cel:
          expression: "device.capacity['memory'].compareTo(quantity('80Gi')) >= 0"
```
you could do:
```
      selectors:
      - capacity:
          memory: 80GB
```
This doesn't make sense for arbitrary attributes, but it could for quantities.

Author: I still don't quite buy that argument. Such a "capacity" selector could also be called "requirements" with the implied semantic of "at least this" and then it would make sense for quantity and version attributes:
```
selectors:
- requirements:
    memory: 80GB
    driverVersion: 2.0.0
```

We talked about "consumable quantities", which would be a different semantic. Because the semantic of those is different, we can't use the existing `BasicDevice` and would have to define something new. 

I'm pretty sure `BasicDevice.Capacity` will always have the same semantic as it has now.

Reviewer 3: I am unclear why we could not support consumption in the existing model?

Author: The scheduler cannot distinguish between "this capacity A is consumable" and "that capacity B is not consumable". The semantic is always the latter right now.

We need a new API for marking capacities as consumable, and I don't see how to fit that into the `BasicDevice` struct.

Author: As I remember it, there was a dislike for having an attribute that looks like a consumable capacity elsewhere.

Reviewer 3: I don't object to Quantity-typed attributes AS LONG AS we can say why we need them to NOT be consumable.

> Current GPU memory is not consumable

Only because we do not have a "request" consumption model.  Consumption is how we indicate that it is unavailable to others - once we have sub-device capabilities, this will be very important, right?

Author: > Only because we do not have a "request" consumption model.

The hardware also has to support it. We could define such a model, but who is going to use it for what?

MIG has sub-partitions, but only with pre-defined memory, which then is again an attribute of that sub-partition, not some consumable capacity. @klueska: is that correct?

>  once we have sub-device capabilities, this will be very important, right?

Once we add that, we need API extensions. We cannot simply re-intepret an existing field.

IMHO the right approach would be to add a "Quantity" type to atttributes and to remove the `Capacity` field until we define it in a way which is not "another attribute".

I don't care whether we then keep or remove the "Integer" attribute type.

Reviewer 3: I thought there was at least one non-MIG mode which allowed device sharing - https://developer.nvidia.com/blog/improving-gpu-utilization-in-kubernetes/#cuda_multi-process_service

> Once we add that, we need API extensions

Do we have the request model worked out yet?  What part of it doesn't work?

Reviewer 2: You don't want to be doing MPS sharing at this level.

There are a bunch of gotchas:
* The same Linux user needs to be used to run on each MPS "partition" for a given GPU. 
* There is no fault isolation between different MPS partitions (meaning that if one container's job borks the GPU, all MPS processes on that GPU go down as well).
* A container can escape out of MPS isolation at anytime by simply unsetting a few envvars before launching it's job. It then has free rein to do what it wants on the full GPU.

The best (and only really correct) way to do MPS is via what I have been calling "user-mediated" sharing.

The idea being that the user asks for a full GPU with MPS sharing mode enabled (via opaque parameters), and then the user takes charge to carve up the GPU as he sees fit between his workloads (via `CUDA_MPS_PINNED_DEVICE_MEM_LIMIT` and `CUDA_MPS_ACTIVE_THREAD_PERCENTAGE ` envars set in each container referencing the shared GPU).

This is the reason we've always been hesitant to add support for MPS into our standard device plugin. I wouldn't recommend adding support for MPS via a request model if we had one.

I only see NVIDIA GPUs making use of a request model if/when linux support for GPU cgroups ever materializes. That way we can set limits / percentages on GPU memory and GPU compute the same way we do CPU memory and CPU compute.  Last I heard this effort was stalled though, and I'm not sure what the current status of it is.

Author: So how do we proceed?

I see the following options:
- Keep it-as is (= semantically it is an attribute), promote the current API to beta.
- Remove `BasicDevice.Capacity` and replace it with a `Quantity` attribute type in v1beta1. This implies removing v1alpha3 in that same release or doing manual conversion with a slight hack: when converting v1alpha3 -> v1beta1, we have to assume that attribute and capacity names don't clash. That's not required at the moment in v1alpha3, but most likely true to all existing DRA drivers.

cc @johnbelamaric 

I'm keeping the PR open because I don't want to loose this discussion. We could merge without adding further clarifications to the README.md in this PR, that can come later when describing next steps.

Reviewer 4: Per-device consumable capacities don't work well right now with current NVIDIA technology. There are use cases for it in things like Pod offloading to DPUs, but those are not our current focus. So, we have deprioritized building the device model support for that as of today. I think there is reason to believe this will be a useful thing eventually, maybe for GPUs, but maybe not.

> The intent was that all capacity is consumable, or else it is not in capacity.
Agreed.

> The hardware also has to support it. 
I actually disagree with this. Ideally the hardware supports it, but there is still value allowing the scheduler to dole out partial resources among cooperative users, even if the cooperation is no enforced. The problem is that there are more severe gotchas today with NVIDIA, at least, as Kevin describes. A noisy neighbor being rude and starving other processes is not nearly so bad as one that can read their memory or crash them.

In any case, I agree with Tim that it is the *consumption* semantic that would define whether we consider partial allocations of the consumable capacities. So, all "capacity" ones are consumable; we just haven't built the *claim* mechanism for that yet. In CEL, the reference to the "foo" capacity is the raw capacity, regardless of allocations, and *that* semantic will not change.

So - to me, we should keep it as is and advance it to beta.

Author: > So, all "capacity" ones are consumable

@klueska already refuted that for the NVidia DRA driver. It publishes "memory" as a capacity because it has to (no quantity attribute), but if we defined and implemented some mechanism in the scheduler which then grants access to that same `BasicDevice` in two unrelated `ResourceClaims`, it won't necessarily work (needs to be the same Linux user) and won't be safe (fault isolation, limit enforcement).

I can see that if all users of such a BasicDevice agree, then Kubernetes might let them do it anyway, but I am not sure whether that's wise. It feels like a footgun to me.

> So - to me, we should keep it as is and advance it to beta.

I think DRA drivers should opt into letting users consume capacity. If they don't opt in, it's not consumable. Another argument is that we currently might not provide enough information to Kubernetes about how it can split up a capacity if it is consumable (the block size, for example).

I'd prefer to have `BasicDevice.Capacity` as a `map[QualifiedName]DeviceCapacty` with
```
type DeviceCapacity struct {
    Quantity resource.Quantity
    <future fields to be added here for consumable capacity>
}
```

That won't round-trip easily into v1alpha3 where `Capacity` is a `map[QualifiedName]resource.Quantity`. But let's not let ourselves be constrained by that. The priority has to be to have a sane `v1beta1` API. Whether we want to and can continue to support `v1alpha3` in 1.32 is less important.

I've created https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/127386 to track this questions. Let's continue there.

)

// ResourceSliceSpec contains the information published by the driver in one ResourceSlice.
type ResourceSliceSpec struct {
    // Driver identifies the DRA driver providing the capacity information.
    // A field selector can be used to list only ResourceSlice
    // objects with a certain driver name.
    //
    // Must be a DNS subdomain and should end with a DNS domain owned by the
    // vendor of the driver. This field is immutable.
    //
    // +required
    Driver string

    // Pool describes the pool that this ResourceSlice belongs to.
    //
    // +required
    Pool ResourcePool

    // NodeName identifies the node which provides the resources in this pool.
    // A field selector can be used to list only ResourceSlice
    // objects belonging to a certain node.
    //
    // This field can be used to limit access from nodes to ResourceSlices with
    // the same node name. It also indicates to autoscalers that adding
    // new nodes of the same type as some old node might also make new
    // resources available.
    //
    // Exactly one of NodeName, NodeSelector and AllNodes must be set.
    // This field is immutable.
    //
    // +optional

>     // +oneOf=NodeSelection

Reviewer 5: I'm not familar with oneOf but NodeSelection doesn't match "NodeName, NodeSelector or AllNodes". Is this a typo?

Author: This is not a typo: "NodeName, NodeSelector or AllNodes" are part of a fictional set called "NodeSelection".

It can be called anything, as long as it's used consistently. At least that is the plan - right now, `+oneOf` doesn't do anything.

Reviewer 5: So is this shorthand for you to add validation to only allow one of these?

Author: It's part of the long-term plan to replace manual validation with automatically generated code: https://github.com/alexzielenski/enhancements/blob/declarative-validation/keps/sig-api-machinery/4153-declarative-validation/README.md#alpha

At the moment, consider it part of the documentation. It's enforced through manual validation.

Reviewer 3: We have a semi-skunkworks project to support declarative validation, such that a tag like this (may change names, but same idea) could be used to ensure exactly one field was set without hand-writing that.  I asked for these tags as documentation in the interim.

}
```

##### ResourceQuota

> The core ResourceQuota mechanism checks at admission time whether creating a
> resource in the apiserver would exceed per-namespace limits. This mechanism
> gets extended to support limiting the number of ResourceClaims based on what
> gets requested.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The core ResourceQuota mechanism checks at admission time whether creating a
resource in the apiserver would exceed per-namespace limits. We extend this
mechanim to support limiting the number of ResourceClaims based on what
gets requested.
```

> A resource entry in ResourceQuota with the special
> `<device-class-name>.deviceclass.resource.k8s.io/devices` limits the number of
> ResourceClaim objects in a namespace such that the number of devices requested
> through those objects with that class does not exceed the limit. When admins
> define classes so that they select specific device types, this quota mechanism
> can be used to limit access to those device types.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A resource entry in ResourceQuota with the name
`<device-class-name>.deviceclass.resource.k8s.io/devices` limits the number of
ResourceClaim objects in a namespace such that the number of devices requested
through objects with that device class does not exceed the specified limit. When admins
define device classes so that they select specific device types, this quota mechanism
can be used to limit access to those device types.
```

A single request may cause the allocation of multiple devices. For exact
counts, the quota limit is based on the sum of those exact counts. For requests
asking for "all" matching devices, the maximum number of allocated devices per

> claim is used as a worst-case upper bound.

Reviewer 2: I don't quite understand this part "the maximum number of allocated devices per claim is used as a worst-case upper bound". Can we be more specific, by referring to one of the constants defined in our go-spec above?

Author: Will do.

Author: Updated, please take another look.

Requests asking for "admin access" contribute to the quota. In practice,
namespaces where such access is allowed will typically not have quotas

> configured.

Reviewer 2: Is this just because it is simpler to implement? I would think that since the resources are not actually "allocated" they shouldn't count against quota.

Author: Yes, for the sake of simplicity. It allowed removing one if check in the code. I had it initially and was asked to remove it.

Reviewer 2: Still seems odd to me (because you essentially end up double counting the same resource) but OK.

Reviewer 2: @johnbelamaric @thockin what was the rationale for having these semantics?

Author: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/120611#discussion_r1688013919

> Still seems odd to me (because you essentially end up double counting the same resource)

Counting is by namespace. Users in their namespace have a quota and so might admins (if enabled in their namespace, which probably won't happen). That it's counting the same device doesn't make a difference, it's about "how much do you get access to" in both cases.

Reviewer 3: I agree that this is unlikely to matter in practice, so easier / simpler is better

Reviewer 4: +1
